Upon performing research online, as well as during my experience in this class, I learned a great deal about park factors. A park factor is an assessment of how much a baseball park affects play there. It can be calculated for numerous factors, such as batting, on base percentage, stealing, etc. In general, however, it is usually used to analyze pitching and hitting biases based on parks. The effects of this are most obvious in for these statistics because the air thickness of parks, the length of the outfield and the height of the fences can all drastically impact one’s ability to pitch and bat. Despite all these utilities, there is a major problem with park factors in that it does not take into account the quality of pitching staff at specific parks, and a strong pitcher could potentially make a park look less hitter friendly than it really is. In order to address this, my baseball statistic, the “adjusted x park factor”, where ‘x’ is the specific park factor being analysed, takes into account the quality of pitchers to create a more balanced statistic for park analysis.

This statistic is, obviously, most closely related to the various other park statistics. This is due to the fact that it is simply those park statistics but modified to incorporate pitcher quality. In respect to these statistics, the adjustment performs interestingly. It is neither consistently higher nor lower than the unadjusted version of the statistics and in some cases shows itself to be more volatile, due to the fact that pitcher quality is more changing than the park factors. Regardless, on fields with exceptional park factors, the statistic tends to normalize them more due to the fact that the pitchers there are usually at least part of the cause. This statistic is also related to ERA, as that is the assessment of pitchers incorporated into the park factor. However, asking how this statistic compares to ERA isn’t a question that can be answered as they are measuring entirely different things.

The exact method of calculation of this statistic is interesting. First, all the necessary data for the park factors is collected and calculated, after which the park factors themselves are, too, calculated. Because the park factors take the form of a percent, they are multiplied by 100 to get it in that format. As ERA is not in a format that works for this, it must first be normalized. Because ERA before 1920 is significantly lower than in subsequent years according to retrosheet, this data is discounted to yield actually useful results. After all the relevant ERA data is compiled, the mean and standard deviation of the data is collected and the ERAs are normalized through it with the mean being 0. From here, it is added to 100 so that it is more or less equivalent to a percentage and can be graphed alongside it. After this, the park factor is divided by the adjusted ERA to create a statistic that fluctuates in respect to both. The difference between the statistics for the Colorado Rockies in comparison to all teams is shown below.

https://imgur.com/a/fLrnVVb

As can be seen, for a team like the Rockies, the park factor is generally lowered due to above average pitching skill, but for all teams, the park factor is both raised and lowered circumstantially. Though these graphs mostly show lowering, the graph of all years since baseball started also shows lots of heightening due to periodic fluctuations.

The link to the youtube video is here: https://youtu.be/5SPeaRmL7-I, unfortunately it is too big and could not be uploaded
